nice thing about using targeted and
nutritive therapies is that the cancers
can no longer attract the shell and what
happens over time is that their capacity
to build this cell around themselves
becomes less and less possible and
that's because they don't secrete the
factors that throw out the cells that
form the shell
so what you do then is come back with
some kind of immune therapy as either
maintenance or as down the road there
so there is a path forward that has to
be rational logical and sequence
welcome to Target cancer podcast my name
is Dr sanjanaja I'm a hematologist and
medical oncologist also known as the ant
talk on social media we try to educate
and do a bunch of stuff today is super
special because I have basically one of
the biggest reasons I actually went into
oncology and believe it or not City may
not know this is also like I get a
little style when I see your picture
sometime I'm like oh I kind of like that
I think you have a shirt just like this
so we have the Pulitzer Prize winner
best-selling author the person that
really Bridges kind of academics of
oncology with philosophical you know
just ideas of how everything is uh
interplayed Dr Siddhartha Mukherjee who
is here to talk about hopefully a couple
of things but the thing that I find
really interesting which is one of the
questions I get most on all my Social
Media stuff is diet diet what can I do
for diet you know to prevent cancer but
especially I get a lot of questions when
people have cancer and it's super
frustrating because a lot of times the
medical oncologist the answer is well
you want to do this and that but nothing
concrete so Dr thank you so much for
being here and we're excited to have you
my pleasure thank you for having me one
of the things and you know I think
anyone that that kind of follows my
educational handle stuff knows about
your book Emperor vomalities it's always
the one that I kind of you know
recommend when people are kind of faced
with a cancer diagnosis one of the
biggest things about cancer as you know
and it's kind of the reason for the book
I'm trying to write which is it's time
to cancel the term a cure for cancer
because it's very deceptive right you're
basically trying to take something that
arguably was almost celestially
orchestrated or divinely orchestrated to
have so many fail stops that is the
human body through Evolution cells what
if this doesn't work what if that
doesn't work you tend to take all that
like over hundreds and thousands of
years the mechanics and algorithms and
you're trying to basically now have to
fight it when those same mechanisms are
in place but all of a sudden it's going
rogue and it makes it interesting but
also again deceptive because it's hard
to find a cure there's all kinds of
mechanisms in place one of the things
outside of targeted therapy that we talk
about in Precision medicine and saying
okay this is the on switch that makes it
grow and this is the thing that's making
it Escape immunity so stop that you're
just you're frantically trying to you
know keep everything up to speed with as
quickly as the cancer which I kind of
relate to viruses grows but you're
looking at also what are the tools it
uses outside of like necessarily you
know the targets that we use and the
immunity and you're looking at basically
amino acids or the fuel or the gas
potentially if that's not too kind of
rudimentary on are there some cancer
types and pancreatic is one of them
which you always say why is it so
stubborn it makes you know it recruits
your own cells it uses fiberglass to
repel other people micro environment
stuff but you're like let's look and to
see like really are there some tools
that it's using that does make it unique
and is that where you started with
talking about these amino acids and
pancreatic cancer yes but let's maybe we
should take a step back yeah the step
back it goes back to the 2000s and the
early 2000s now cancer is of course a
genetic disease even if it's
caused occasionally by viruses like
human papilloma virus or Epstein-Barr
virus but it's essentially these viruses
or genes themselves are mutated
and ultimately cancer is a genetic
disease
genes are mutated those genes turn
the normal processes of growth abnormal
those cells now grow abnormally the we I
liken it to saying it's like a car where
the accelerators are jammed the acceler
is being excited the growth or the
bricks are snapped so that the cell can
no longer
have its normal ways of dividing right
and the key is when you say genetic and
that was one of our podcasts is we don't
mean necessarily that was an inherited
genetics right so people I think often
mistake that to mean like oh but I don't
have it in my family that we mean things
that 85 percent of the time there used
to be 95 now we're saying okay maybe
we've learned about some more 80 percent
time it's something that was errors in
these genes with replication of billions
of times in your lifetime in your
lifetime that causes these errors that's
correct so so there are two kinds of
or the three kinds of errors that can be
caused right one is we talk already
about viruses uh viruses can come in
tamper with your genes make yourself
behave abnormally
the second kind of error is that you
unfortunately
inherit something from your family
which gives you a higher risk of getting
cancer that would be genes like bracha 1
p53 and other syndromes and those
patients have higher risks of cancer
it's a little bit hard to quantify that
number because that number keeps
changing we used to think that they were
single genes they're single genes that
are very strong in their effect but now
we know that there are other patients
who have multiple genes tens 12s 15s
maybe even hundreds that they inherit
from their parents which raise their
risk of cancer by 5 4 10 4 7 40. and
then they're finally genes which are
probably the most important set of genes
that are mutated that change because
when cells divide they make copying
errors like a photocopier makes an error
in making photocopies when Excel divide
it's a photocopier it makes a change and
that change happens to be in a gene that
controls cell growth and that
contributes to cancer so very broadly
speaking those are the categories now
going back to the 2000s we and as a
community I'd say we had this idea that
since cancer is a genetic disease
then it must be the case that if we
could find ways to
block the products made by these genius
proteins we would be very successful and
many drugs came out of that a drug is
called like Gleevec drugs like parasiva
came out of the genetic sequencing and
the genetic understanding of cancer and
they were very successful some of them
like Vivek are extraordinarily
successful and then in the 2010s we
began to feel that we're a little bit
stuck that was a very humbling moment
for everyone because
we thought that we had solved the basic
pathway not the not the answer but the
basic pathway by which we would move
forward in cancer research but we began
to get stuck and the stuckness had to do
with the idea that these genes many of
these cancer genes cancer-causing genes
just one great targets for drugs I'll
give you an example you know I treat
leukemia and when I treat leukemia I
know exactly which genes are mutated I
can tell you their names
they're not relevant Tech to dnmt3a who
knows you can call them various names
and when we try to see if they could be
targeted by either drugs or any other
molecules we never found really good
ways to Target them that was problem
number one problem number two is that
even and this is really really important
even when we did find ways to Target
them especially really the ones that
were strong drivers of cancer what
happened is that the cancer cancer cells
because they're evolving all the time
found ways to go around that Target it's
a little bit like you know we would put
we would find their killings here of
cancer and we'd be very we'd be very
happy and congratulate ourselves and we
would drive an arrow into the Achilles
heel of cancer and the cancer being
growing so fast and evolving would just
take the arrow out and throw it away
yes and and to that exact point you know
that's where
the way that I help I think people
understand is the same way was like with
covet I thought we vaccinated against I
think it's over the same way that
viruses kind of like grow and then they
get these variants right they they look
different well why do I need another
booster that's more comprehensive what
does that mean well if that protein that
you're attacking that M Spike or that M
protein uh on the initial if like they
just get smarter it's like the selection
pressure of a viral Illness but in this
in this case with therapy then all of a
sudden
in their desperation they're like okay I
can you know undergo Calamity and
basically try to find any escape to
where this thing isn't needed anymore
the same way when we walk hormone
cancer it's often a misconception that
the cancer is evolving as we give the
therapy that's not the case the cancers
and the viruses
because they're mutating all the time
and they have
what's happening really is that there's
already and I have to emphasize this
there's already a
variant that is resistant correct and
all you're doing is killing off
everything else and selecting that
variant exactly
um this was a big realization actually
cancer doesn't have a brain and viruses
don't have brains either
but they do have mechanisms by which
they mutate and if you have a billion of
them then there's a chance that one of
them has already even before you start
the therapy has already developed a
mutation
that will cause it to resist your
therapy so then the term I'm happy you
said that because the term you know we
had Dr Keith Flaherty talking about you
know in some sense like the immune
system play and everything like that but
we use this term Escape mechanisms but
to your point and it's a very good one
is when people say well oh chemo you
know they actually are not carrying the
cancer on purpose right that's one of
the things I get on social media and
it's like it's hard to explain why after
nine months to 14 you know 18 months
especially like you said egfr it's
aggresso and all these things it's hard
to explain to somebody short of
testicular where you can cure it with
chemo why how you can't see anything but
but it still always comes back and and
there's this you know you learn from
kind of opinion because I think it's
better to just like accept where it's
coming from then fight it and the
thought is well then why is it coming
back how come if it all went away comes
back into your point and even that term
Escape mechanism which they always talk
about in colorectal with like oh well
now they're not using this pathway
what you're saying is it wasn't an
escape it was it turned out to be an
escape like in retrospect because it
already underwent something that was not
going to be this basically vulnerable to
what the initial chemo and the initial
tumor burden was that's what all the
science shows thus far that makes so
much more sense that the mechanism by
which a cancer stops responding to your
therapy even if it started your therapy
is not because it has a brain and we
figured out
that you know this is the way I'm going
to escape it it is because it already
possessed a mutation that allowed would
have allowed it in any case to escape
the toxicity of the of the drug this has
many many many consequences we can come
to that in a second
it has many consequences for how we
think about therapy how we build therapy
but we can come come to all of that in a
second all right now in the 2000s we
thought that if we found enough drugs
that would kill the cancer cells
targeted drugs especially we would
Conquer Cancer and some of them were
very successful we talked about we
talked about really that being really
the best example for a cancer called
chronic biologinus leukemia or CML
Gleevec really takes that cancer and
puts it into one of the most profound
remissions that has ever existed we were
so excited and we thought that all
cancers behave like this and you know
we'll find these Achilles heels for all
cancers pancreatic colon Etc and that's
how things are going to go ahead and
then reality things it hits slowly and
slowly and now it's hit really hard and
by heart I mean that we've tried now
we've found in two problems problem
number one is that cancers some genetic
mutations that are in cancers we don't
even have drugs for and we can't even
seem to find them problem number two is
that when we do find them they have that
same they undergo resistance the most
striking of these is after Decades of
work we found a drug a group led by
Kevin showcat and others found a drug
that was exquisitely specific to block a
pathway that was that is considered one
of the central mechanisms of many many
cancers and when they use the drug
the extension of life was like 11 months
or 10 months the cancer is resistant and
all the patients died similarly work
done by Lou Cantley who supports my
collaborator will talk about all of that
found drugs against another very
prominent Gene that's mutated in cancer
called B10 same story when they you know
when it was applied the extension of
life was a few months but to your
previous point do we call it resistance
then or is it that it just satisfied the
initial like you know tumor biology and
molecular sequencing of what we biopsied
and really just were already behind the
new one that was going to be P10
resistant or previous one you mentioned
it's you know you don't mean like the
semantics then because you really like
injected this interesting thought to me
about how is it escapes is it resistance
or is it just sheer Serendipity of sorts
like fortunate for the cancer where it's
already ahead of you like you've already
had this very that exists all right yes
so let me say a few things about that
Bert robot scene who's probably one of
the smartest cancer researchers on the
planet always says that there are three
zeros between one billion and one
billion if you have one billion cancer
cells in your body that's one billion
opportunities that the cancer cell has
to have a mechanism by which it can
resist a drug if you have 1 million
cancer cells in your body it's three log
or three times zero a thousand times
less likely to create resistance against
the drug right so keep that in the back
of your mind because numbers matter but
let's go back to the story that I'm
trying to tell you we then began to
realize that maybe it's not the cancer
cell that we should be attacking only
we can still attack the cancer cell
but really what the cancer cell has
built around itself the home the nest
and that Nest has many components cancer
cells need nutrients they need blood
vessels they need to build a tissue
environment around around themselves
almost like an organ and maybe we should
be instead of killing cancer cells only
we should be focusing our attention on
these metabolic pathways nutrient
Pathways the the nests that the cancer
is building on themselves the blood
vessels that they draw
the immune system that can or cannot
look at them
etc etc etc so by the mid-2000s a new
idea is and was being born around cancer
and that is that let's not attack just
the cancer cell let's attack these homes
these nutrients these metabolic pathways
that cancers build around themselves and
that's where I come in that's where I
grew up because I like many other people
was disappointed but also excited about
the idea that maybe the problem is not
just the cancer cell but this home this
environment micro environment nutrient
environment metabolic environment immune
environment vascular blood vessel
environment that the cancer builds
around itself the advantage of these
environments is that unlike the cancer
they don't mutate there aren't billions
of them they are relatively static and
that's where I began to think that oh
gosh maybe my work should be not around
sequencing cancer cells and finding
drugs that kill the cancer cell but
rather thinking about what the cancer
cell builds around itself metabolically
vascularly blood vessel wise you know
it's home
etc etc I'm so sorry to interrupt you
but the one thing that I thought think
about again with these kind of
allegories to just like human life as a
whole is the same strategy they use in
medieval times right if you had a castle
and you had a whole bunch of people in
there and you knew you couldn't really
overtake the castle it was a strategy to
basically say well heck we're just not
gonna let you bring food and water and
just starve the people inside and they
build even in modern like War yeah right
you would learn the fields around the
castle and starve the people right
without having to attack those
Gladiators they just they starve like
you're you're and they do it for war
even Advanced like oh let's not let them
get their weapons across this way so
it's like you know they're powerful but
you just want to dismantle the things
that would be and that's the strategy
that I thought would be very interesting
that's wild and so when I launched my
cancer career it was all around that
strategy it was all around I don't
sequence cancers I mean I sequence
cancers meditate but that's not what I
do as my sort of intellectual living
what I do is I think about Cancers and I
think about what homes they build if you
think about again your analogy like
who's bringing in the food into the
castle what food is it and can I block
the food can I block the blood vessels
and that's how fire started if I had
started with this idea that it's great
that you know you can find drugs against
the cancer but let's also block the
mechanisms by which the cancers are
metabolizing eating growing etc etc etc
and that's the really the basis for
fired as a kind of an intellectually uh
the intellectual business with the
company and that's interesting and
because you're leveraging what we know
people sometimes think of cancers like
this enigmatic nebulous you know foreign
thing but it's not it's it it was once a
normal cell of sorts the one that
started it all and it has a bunch of the
tools that we know about normal cells so
you're like let's extrapolate that like
just knowing what the biology of cells
are like and seeing if we it's almost a
back door because now you're not trying
to do the things that make it it's like
any of those shows movies the thing that
makes it so scary like this thing will
never be defeated like Venom or whoever
and instead of backdoor you're not
trying to fight the things that make
them so malignant but instead say dude
I'm not gonna unless you have the tools
to be able to like carry out your you
know that malignant effect which is just
it just so novel and then the question
though would be that I think a lot of
people would you know higher level and
think okay but then wouldn't that
starvation cause a starvation you know
for your own intrinsic cells and my
answer my guess would be no because
they're not as hungry are not on the
sixth year in that in that car very
important question so there is a
relatively narrow window by which in
which we can find these metabolic
Achilles heels so it turns out that
cancers because they're growing so
quickly and because they're dependent so
acutely on nutrients are different from
normal cells now this was known for a
long time German scientists named Otto
Warburg knew about this in the 1900s
early 1900s if cancer is metabolize
sugar differently than normal cells lots
of scientists have known since that time
that cancers metabolize amino acids to
make proteins
differently from normal cells look
Handley and I showed that cancer is
metabolize sugar
especially when they're given stress
with a drug differently than normal
cells
so there are in fact Achilles heels for
cancers which will not affect
normal cells but will affect cancer
cells
because the cancer cells are very very
acutely dependent on these amino acids
for their growth now you may have some
side effects but they're nowhere near
what you would expect from people it's
kind of like the same concept of
cytotoxic chemo somebody might say well
well if it's cancer cells are normal and
you're giving a poison from the yew tree
taxol whatever like when they poison
your regular cells yes but the reason
that it's so effective and the reason
for the earliest phase one and phase two
is give it enough for the stuff that
replicates fast and gets the damage and
the ones that are slower the hair ones
the GI ones may suffer a little bit more
it's literally taking that concept but
backwards it's like saying you know you
need gas and and a change of oil at a
certain frequency but if you're in sixth
gear in an M5 you're going to need it
something different than being in third
gear at a lower speed and having a much
you know less aggressive engine it's the
same ish strategy of being able to like
distinguish the two in the cytotoxic
realm but instead in the provision realm
which is like what you're providing for
it to be able to execute so that's
that's so interesting and then of course
I think it's a wonderful questions
it's not just a hypothesis it turns out
that the genes that are mutated in
cancer cells don't just mutate the
growth of the cell or change
they actually find mechanisms by which
they can use these amino acids and use
them in quicker in quicker ways in
faster ways so it's it's like once the
brakes and the accelerators have been
jammed and broken
in your car analogy it's as if that the
entire engine begins to say I can use
corn oil corn uh how they're trying to
get fuel and gas with the corn products
I can
eat that I used to be able to use yes
and that's something that no one knew
but over time we and others have found
that you know this is what the genes do
they figure out different ways to use
the gas and use the gas faster and the
faster that they use the gas the more
dependent the more addicted they become
to the pathway by which they're using
the dance in totally what happens is
that they they find a mechanism and our
job is to prevent them from finding that
mechanism and in fact prevent them from
even using that mechanism to fuel their
growth often people say oh you know
cancers eat sugar so you don't don't eat
sugar because you'll just you know fuel
your cancer stuff that's not right
cancers are more sophisticated than that
it's not like they're eating sugar
they're metabolizing sugar and
metabolizing and eating is a different
thing right metabolizing means that
converting chemically converting things
into other substances that allow them to
fuel their growth eating means obviously
ingesting something so it's not like you
you aren't feeding the cancer in the
sense that you understand like in in the
common common places what you're doing
is you're you're targeting very
particular metabolic pathways chemical
Pathways in the cancer
such that that addiction that the cancer
cell has to whatever it might be amino
acids certain amino acids certain kinds
of sugar etc etc is disrupted so when
you go to your doctor it's not like
you're gonna go to your doctor and say
I'm going to stop eating sugar what
you're gonna have to do if fire is
successful is you're going to have to
find very specific and we've found them
already very specific ways in which you
interrupt or disrupt the metabolic
pathways internal digestive system of
cancer cells such that they can no
longer grow that's a huge statement the
internal metabolism I hope people heard
that it's not your body but the cell
yeah it's not your body it's the
internal digestive system of that cancer
cell yes yeah that's a huge point yeah
so you you you cannot starve your cancer
as far as we know all those people be
crying this for a while you can't starve
the cancer by starving yourself you
could but you would die in the process
that's what I that's what I kind of say
I'm like it's a it's a technically
correct statement yes you can solve your
cancer cells but your own cells will die
well before that so like it's that
concept is there's no way that you can
just completely block everything it's
not binary one thing feed one thing not
all of the ways that they process and
everything are you know you just you
can't without without literally killing
a person in the process exactly so
instead what you do is you find a
particular internal digestive system
of a cancer cell find the molecules that
are part of the internal digestive
system of the cancer cell that make it
vulnerable to particular nutrients and
you block that internal digestive system
without causing you know you your whole
body to starve and there's a there's a
line or a window by which you can do
that after a certain point of time
if you kept doing that your whole body
would start starving so somewhere in
that window there's a sweet spot there's
a sweet spot and bias and we and all our
scientists have found such sweet spots
there's not one there are many there are
amino acids they're kind of sugars
etc etc etc but it's not like you know
you can say to yourself I'm not going to
eat any protein and my cancer is going
to go away it's not going to happen you
have to find as I said the internal
metabolism of the cancer and we have
Target those and make sure that that
doesn't affect the rest of the body but
slows down the growth
that makes sense that makes perfect
sense and I think the next question that
if anyone listened to previous podcasts
is I had one where I really wanted to
delineate you know the kind of almost
rudimentary way we thought of
histopathology as like oh this is how
the Cancer's gonna behave it's like oh
it's it's I don't know of the lung or
you know whatever and and you know these
episodes help people appreciate how dude
it's so much more than that it's not
just the histopath it's like okay
proteanomics is it hurt too positive or
not and then okay now we're talking
molecular so the same way all that stuff
is complicated and then you know if you
can use your bracket pathway or not
we've we've dissected all these things
my next question I think some of the
viewers would say is
okay Dr Mukherjee
is this a carbon copyable observation or
is it something that you need to take
your own like somatic tissue of that
cancer cell don't put it in formalin
take it and actually study that kind of
like particular fingerprint and
blueprint of that cancer cell or does
everything look like it's actually you
know applies in some correlation to
either a molecular profile or just even
the histopath I suppose for that
quote-unquote pancreatic or whatever
that tumor may be so it's an incredibly
important question
how personalized does this have to get
um and the answer is that so far it
seems as if these mechanisms are
relatively General
I'll use the word relatively because it
has a little bit of a dependence
on what genes are mutated because some
genes are particularly good at as I said
hijacking the fuel and those of course
are the cancers that we want to send
Achilles arrows right some genes that
are particularly good but those but it's
they're not like weirdly uncommon Gene
these are common genes that are commonly
mutated in cancers so it's not like you
have to do an incredibly complicated
histopath right or it can be complicated
genetic pathology on the cancer and then
come back and say oh you know I'm going
to only make a particular diet
for you that's specific for you it's
much more that I would say that your
cancer like 15 others or 20 others or
100 others or 500 others has a gene that
has a particular capacity to use this
fuel we know this because of
experimental data so the diet that we're
going to prescribe for you is X or Y
right so you've observed that like
you've like and that's that's the that's
the answer right in in real scientific
models yes right this is not this is not
a hypothesis right this is like and
that's that's the answer there is is
when somebody says well Sanji you always
talk about like Precision this is
because that is remember the the closest
thing to a fingerprint without taking
the cell is just doing the sequencing If
You observe that hey if it has x x z
double zero it seems to like use these
amino acids XC double zero ooh Let's
test it oh yep sure enough they all be
in the same way I mean that's how you
that's that that isn't a very basic way
how we treat hormone positive breast
cancer if it has R2 you use it if you
don't don't doesn't mean like eventually
down the line maybe the not working this
and that but we know that works and
that's why a lot of people see it
disappear up front so that's super cool
and interesting now and I'm sure you
were getting to this I'm just going to
swipe it a little bit sooner but we've
said many times and I've said and Keith
Flaherty says that most expensive
freedom I know you do because I already
know the answer to this so forgive me
but but that the way we're gonna like
control cancer for a long time if not
cure all cancers but at least control is
going to be a multi-modality thing right
so you talk about immune therapy and
your podcast with Peter and Tia and how
phenomenal it was you're re-enabling
something that's always been doing what
it's doing and got tricked for a moment
you took off that you know invisible
cloak from Harry Potter and all of a
sudden it gets exploited and it gets
attacked so you talk about immune
therapy we talk about this cytotoxics
when that's appropriate for the
replication we talk about targeted
therapies can this be done can I attack
it from both ends can I attack that
driver that that Thor hammer that the
cancer is trying to use and I hopefully
can Target it or I have to use cytotoxic
just because it's so fast chemo but can
I also then like Rob them if it's you
know calories and hydrate and get them
into an Aki basically by starving is it
possible to attack it from both ends or
even triple end if we can incorporate
them into every one day of course it
matters on the cancer type but surely
you can if this could be used
concurrently with with standard care
Target therapies and cytotoxic I mean
that's just that just feels good yeah
combination
that's amazing
there's absolutely no reason that we
aren't using most of these therapies and
economies
and that's why I said it's important to
think about numbers I love numbers I'm
sure you love numbers
um there's a difference between 1
billion one trillion and one million so
what do we do a one rational way
and there may be many rational companies
but one rational way to do all of this
would be when you have a big tumor and
you have a big tumor burden you use
cytotoxics to kill most of your cells so
you do a one billion to one million
reduction now why does that help it
helps for many reasons but the main
reason it helps is it gives the cancer
1000 less chances of the communities oh
see I don't think to highlight that
that's so true it's the Rapid Way of
just trying to reduce the chance of
these like variants that get smarter ah
that gives an interesting point to using
immunotherapy alone for a high pd-1
versus like you know and against
extrapolation versus Triple agent
because yeah you might say oh this could
respond well but we know immune therapy
takes a while versus like if it's high
burden lung like you know arguably so
interesting why wouldn't you want to
knock it downside reductively and
incorporate that immunotherapy that's
such a huge point that it's never been
brought up on these shows I'm so happy
you said that so the first thing that
you would do rationally speaking is
cytorejaptive therapy and it's
cytoductive for several reasons of
course it relieves some symptoms but
more importantly it reduces the number
of chances that the cancer has
to create a resistant mutation and if
it's a high disease break if you've got
the cancer super early you don't need
cyroductive therapy because you're
already not at one billion cells but at
one million cells all right now you
reduce the cancer burden and now you use
multiple angles of Attack One angle of
attack is to use nutritive therapy
so that you can starve the cancer the
second angle of attack is that while
you're starving the cancer you use
targeted therapy and the third angle is
that we've now learned over and over
again that immune therapies don't work
for many Cancers and we started figuring
out why that's because cancers invent a
kind of shell around themselves a shell
of other cells a nest a home a citadel a
port whatever you want to call it and
immune cells can't get in there the nice
thing about using targeted and nutritive
Therapies
is that the cancers can no longer
attract the shell and what happens over
time is that their capacity to build
this cell around themselves becomes less
and less possible and that's because
they don't secrete the factors that draw
out the cells that form the shell so
what you do then is come back with some
kind of immune therapy as either
maintenance or as down the road
so there is a path forward but it has to
be rational logical and sequenced
so you do cycle reduction to reduce
mutational burden
that's the immediate threat that's the
day-to-day threat of having this
recurrence right resistance you use
cyroductive therapy and then you slowly
begin to joke and paralyze the cancer
and as you choke and paralyze the cancer
imagine going back to your analogy of
the Citadel right
The Citadel if you burn the fields
around the Citadel if you burn the
fields around the fort people in the
fort can't come out anymore and start
planting new Fields so what that
happened was that enables it to happen
is that the immune cells can start going
in
and potentially restarting an immune
reaction and we have other companies and
other programs I have and others have
other programs to do exactly that is
that once you've burnt the field once
you've burnt out the supply chain as it
were for the cancer cell
you then come back with immune therapies
of various sorts so that now they can
enter the fort and start killing the
cells themselves
so it's all it has to be done
sequentially and thoughtfully
and there's there are many blockades we
can talk in another program about what
the blockades are there's farmer
companies that won't collaborate there
are some that will collaborate blah blah
blah but there is a road forward and the
road forward is not just absurd it's not
nonsense it's it's very logical right he
says
that they're like you build one on top
of the other right it's not like you're
just like oh I think one day like no
it's like we're we're finding the
different ways to really you know beat
that thing or not even that I hate to
use singular terms but but like you said
the sequence and that's the point we
haven't hit well is very important I'll
do one more on top of that I don't know
how you feel about it but I actually
have a podcast coming up and I'm a buddy
of mine he's a PhD uh he went to
Juilliard in person anyway he said
someday the reason people aren't talking
about this because it's not sexy it's
not talking to therapy but what they're
looking at is basically to putting like
high intense like triple levels of
chemotherapy intra-tumly with an
injection to do what's called antigen
presenting cells antigen presenters same
story and then you do that immune system
to hopefully give it even more targets
to hone on exactly the same story you
think that you know you do high doses of
therapy into a tumor to kill the tumor
that's not the reason you're doing the
high doses no you're doing it
get it out
the immune system so that it can now go
to other tumors
and there's a fancy name for it it's
called the abscopal effect it's me it
means that a tumor in your left arm if
it gets an appropriate immune response
all of a sudden those immune cells can
go to the tumor in your right arm
because they've been educated exactly
and they know how to kill the cells in
your left arm so they now know how to
kill the cells in your right arm or
whatever but that said there's a logical
way to move forward and we are in the
middle of that logical way and and the
only way that we can do that and this is
going to be my last Vlog is to restore
what was broken by covet which was The
Temper trial system we have got to
restore the clinical trial system
because the clinical trial system was
desperately broken by covert nurses left
coordinators left
positions left Emergency Room Physicians
left so we need to restore it so that
all of this knowledge that we're
collecting including the knowledge that
we're collecting in fire
can now become converted into clinical
reactants that's huge that's one of my
big pushes lately because when people
say well why we haven't found Doug cure
again singular but why didn't this have
any other it's because you need the data
to show and now I explain how phase one
and phase two there's a reason people
say well trials or guinea pigs this and
that because back in the day back back
it's like you drip enough poison to see
if it kills the human subject or not
that was science season and Mad Hatter
stuff we are light years away from what
that was right like that was that was
available inside of toxic in the face
who doesn't work now it's like a lot of
what we're doing is stuff that we
already know works with cell allergy or
with targeted even you know things in
other tumor types it's more like that
splitting hairs and then splitting the
Keratin cells and stuff to really be
able to say these are the constituents
and like you said the sequence I'm so
glad you said that because I keep saying
multi-modality but we mean
multi-modality in sequence that is going
to help just dismantle it's kind of
death by a thousand paper cuts it's like
if you can't beat the person and also
the sequence is scientific yeah
scientific it's not like right spaghetti
on the wall it's one by one by one and
the read and there's a reason behind it
right because we know the science
um normal cells and family we've studied
we're taking where you use this term at
some point on the shoulders of those you
know before us we're literally taking
what we've learned in observation stuff
even if it didn't directly relate to
pancakes taking those Concepts which is
why can't which is what science is and
attacking essentially something that is
again a normal cell but we're doing it
based on completely you know
observational understood Concepts and
that's huge now on that note I'm going
to use this analogy and you're probably
going to want to just throw up and or
never talk to me again but but tell me
if this kind of makes sense for our
viewers like little 30 60 second clips
about really like Salient points that
you're making and to your point about
sugar and sugar metabolism and starving
it and not starving it and how you're
saying it's not just a matter of like if
you have it but it's what you do with it
what came to mind oh my God I'm so
embarrassed like hero is gonna I'm gonna
say this if you get into a doggy hot dog
eating contest and you didn't know how
that hot dog eating contest worked and
somebody said you're going to eat as
much as you can this has some big guy
that's just the dude I can put down some
hot dogs he will unequivocally lose
right he's just gonna try eating hot
dogs and imagine a world where you only
had hot dogs for for that matter the
reason he loses is not because he can't
eat or eat fast it's because when you
see a competition you notice the way
they're using it they like put in the
bread first put in the water make it
like much easier to swallow so they
don't struggle and then like chop up the
There's an actual complete it's the same
stuff a hot dog and Devon and the water
but they use it in a manner that
completely if you took away the water
that person that's the best in the world
cannot win like you just cannot win if
you made them do the water at the end or
just the beginning he cannot win so
you've taken the arguably what's his
name or whatever you haven't changed the
person which is the cancer cell you
haven't changed the tools which is the
the bun the the wiener or whatever the
PC term is and water but you've done
something about it to where you've
dismantled that guy from winning any
competition just because of what like of
how it's used and again that's a very
rudimentary example but I hope that can
help people appreciate it's like oh it's
not a simple thing of just take all the
hot dogs like obviously then nobody can
eat but there is some ways to use like
with limitations you can only use this
much water versus an amateur
use it more and more
um that you just came to me I mean based
on your description but but I think it's
pretty accurate it's exactly right which
is that it's not that we're removing
sugar or nutrients from the environment
it's the way that we are removing the
mechanisms or the internal what I call
the internal digestion
of a cancer cell that allows the cancer
cell to succeed over a normal cell
that's right that's the difference
that champion is still like like he's
still the fastest whatever under those
circumstances but he's robbed and you
didn't do anything to him you didn't
change his mouth his tongue his taste
nothing
you just you just monopolize the way
that he was able to like put himself
ahead of the rest that's why amateur
will never win
this is amazing it's a great way a very
surprising way to end with you know
something so amazing with hot dogs it's
America for you Dr Mukherjee this was a
true honor true pleasure I'm I just
can't wait to start funneling and
helping people that are really you know
the one thing about covet is it made
people very curious and feel more
ownership and responsibility and wanting
to have some empowerment and control
over their medical decisions and
especially when it relates to cancers I
think that is some you know the positive
where we can capitalize this is going to
help we're gonna funnel people there
because people care about diets and care
about these things and I'm just so
excited and the only thing the last
message is enrolled in clinical trials
because if you don't or if one doesn't
uh nothing will advance
100 thank you so much this is amazing
[Music]